## Data Science for the Public Good Program {style=text-align:center}
### Patrick County Project (2020) {style=text-align:center}
###
##### **SDAD: [Teja Pristavec (Lead)](https://biocomplexity.virginia.edu/teja-pristavec), [Brandon Kramer](https://biocomplexity.virginia.edu/brandon-kramer), and [Sallie Keller](https://biocomplexity.virginia.edu/sallie-keller)** {style=text-align:center}
##### **DSPG: [Morgan Stockham](https://sites.google.com/view/morganstockham/home), [Tasfia Chowdhury](https://github.com/tmchowdh), and [Isabel Gomez](http://linkedin.com/in/igomez-3099)** {style=text-align:center}
###

**Project summary.** This exploratory project aims to provide actionable insights for Patrick County, VA in addressing barriers to health care access and use for its residents. We will work closely with the County stakeholders to identify priority focus areas (e.g., broadband or transportation infrastructure in the county as related to (tele)health provider access; characterizing the health network in the county as compared to similar rural counties; identifying health provider options and attracting medical professionals to the area). We will identify and use appropriate local, state, and federal data sources to deliver information relevant for decision-makers working to repair the county’s health care system. This effort is part of our [tri-state Gates-funded project](https://dspg.dev8.uvaits.virginia.edu/economic-mobility) addressing barriers to economic mobility in cooperation with extension professionals.  

**Project scope.** The project will focus on (1) reviewing current issues in rural healthcare access and use; (2) identifying key issues for exploration in collaboration with the stakeholder (e.g., availability and access to health care facilities and health care professionals, with particular attention to limited broadband and transportation infrastructure; social determinants of health; health conditions and health behaviors); (3) implementing the data science framework of data discovery, screening, acquisition, fitness-for-use assessment, preparation, linkage, and exploration; (4) conducting exploratory analyses addressing scoped research questions using selected data and stakeholder input, at sub-county level whenever possible; 5) data visualization and interpretation. 

**Importance to sponsor.** Patrick County is a rural county that recently experienced the closure of its only hospital. The county is facing a challenge in providing health care access to its residents given few other health facilities available, lack of resources at the county level, and individual-level inequalities that pose barriers to health care access and use. Patrick County is seeking data-informed insights that can be used to inform their efforts to repair its healthcare delivery system. This project will allow the sponsor to better understand health care provision options for its residents, identify the characteristics of equity and health disparities across the county, and address social determinant of health factors that may be contributing to inequity. Our insights can help the county to design solutions and develop targeted programs for health care delivery at the neighborhood level. 